Pull Request guidelines (#1397)
aws/eks-anywhere: docs/developer/pull-requests.md

# Pull Request guidelines

> This document outlines some good practices to follow when creating or reviewing PRs. These are all guidelines and not hard rules, so take them as so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document outlines best practices to follow when creating and reviewing PRs. These are all guidelines and not hard rules, so take them as so.
```

## As an author

### PR size

> The recommended maximum lines of change is 500. Split PRs as necessary and be guided by the Single Responsibility Principle. Put yourself in the reviewers shoes and consider the cognitive load on the reviewer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended maximum number of lines changed is 500. Split PRs as necessary and be guided by the [Single Responsibility Principle](https://blog.cleancoder.com/uncle-bob/2014/05/08/SingleReponsibilityPrinciple.html). Put yourself in the reviewers shoes and consider the cognitive load on the reviewer.
```

Reviewer 2: > lines of change

LoC

The update reads fine also.

For example, a PR with 1000 LoC touching 20 files could be easy to review if the changes are grammar or could be difficult to review if there are functional changes in loosely related components.

> ### PR descriptions

Reviewer 2: I've felt the pain of poorly constructed messages and over reliance on automated squash features when needing to become a git historian, but I've never found a way to get people to adopt it.

Trying to get people to adopt a good practice for an OSS project with random contributions can be even more of a challenge.

If we do want guidelines (which I think we have to because they're tricky to enforce) I suggest regurgitating this reference (my goto): https://cbea.ms/git-commit/

> ### PR descriptions

Reviewer 3: In the past I've used the [conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0-beta.4/) with tooling like [clog](https://github.com/clog-tool/clog-cli) or [changelog](https://github.com/skuid/changelog) for validation and changelog generation. Not required for this review, but I certainly wouldn't be opposed to adopting something like that

> ### PR descriptions

Reviewer 2: If we're going to commit to auto generated change logs then conventional commits or equivalent can be super useful - release preparation can be time consuming.

Conventional commits compliment the guidelines I posted.

> ### PR descriptions

Author: My 2c on the topic:
Standardized commit messages are very useful and I would be in favor of adopting a standard. Conventional commits works for me but I don't have a strong preference for any standard in particular. I do think that if we do this, it should go hand by hand with some kind of automation, at least for validation.

However, in my opinion, the content of the commit messages matters more than the format itself. And I believe that's where we can provide more value: on guidelines for folks on how to write good commit messages. Maybe this is where the article Chris linked can help. By no means I think this is incompatible with a standardized format, I just think we wouldn't do a lot by only agreeing on a format without trying to improve the content of the messages.

In addition, this topic resurfaces the discussion about manually squashing commits before merge. In my opinion, things like `* fix typos` or `* pass linter` don't add anything useful to the final commit message. 

That said, since I think both topics require further discussion and they have some ramifications in our processes (automation, changing the merge process to manually squash commits...), I would like to start a separate conversation and allow this PR to move forward. Once we reach agreement on the commit message topic, we can just update this doc (it's supposed to be a living document).

@micahhausler Added the clarification about this applying only to github pull requests

Help the reviewer build context asynchronously with a well structured PR description. A good description can serve as documentation for author and reviewer when tracking down changes in the future and for outside contributors to get a feel for what a change is in regard to.

A good PR description should include:
1. A summary of intent including the problem you're solving. The summary may not be fulfilled entirely by this PR but by a series of PRs and the summary should indicate that.
2. Dependent on the PR, a slightly more detailed description about what you're specifically addressing in said PR.
3. What's next? Tell the reviewers what your future intentions are (if it applies).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Include relevant links to the GitHub issue, design docs, documentation, etc, as needed.

```

    * Decisions made in other PRs/issues/private conversations
    * New requirements
    * How does this PR fit the whole project/feature? Very important if splitting something bigger into small PRs. It helps the reviewer fill the gaps and look at you high level solution without having all the code in front of them.

`TODO: add concrete example for a good PR description`

### Review your own changes

Reviewing your own changes increases code quality and streamlines reviews. Add comments to your own PR to notify reviewers you've identified the problem and they don't need to comment. Draw attention from reviewers on areas of code you're unsure about and ask for additional input.

### Design docs

Not all PRs need a design doc. But there is an important difference between a design doc and a well written PR description: the design doc is reviewed before the code is written and the PR description after that.

Write design docs when you/the team wants consensus on an approach/solution/idea before implementing it.

Not all design docs need to be big, sometimes a paragraph is enough. But even that help setting a common understanding/context that author and reviewers can benefit from.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can find existing EKS Anywhere design docs [here](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/tree/main/designs).
```

### PR assignment

> Most of the time, there are other folks involved in the project/feature you are working on, even if it was only during the design phase. Add all of them. If you have on one or your PR is just a small fix/random improvement you came up with, use the GitHub suggested reviewers. If you are in doubt, ping the team in Slack and ask for help.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, there are other folks involved in the project/feature you are working on, even if it was only during the design phase. Add all of them. If no one else has been involved or your PR is just a small fix/random improvement you came up with, use the GitHub suggested reviewers. If you are in doubt, ping the team in Slack and ask for help.
```

### Review comments

In general, all comments are important and should be addressed and/or acknowledged before the PR is merged (emoji reaction, comments, etc.).

If you are planning on not addressing one, talk to the reviewer who wrote it and let them know.

If you are requested to make a change that you would like for some reason to not add to the PR and do it later, talk to the reviewer. But, please don’t use it as an excuse to skip tests. And create issues for it. Checklists in parent issues are super useful for this scenario.

## As a reviewer

### Time to first review SLA

> 24 hours, from the time the PR is open to the time the first review is submitted. That should be more than enough to take into account timezones and PRs open at the end of the day. It gives us at least a full working day to get to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
24 hours from the time the PR is open to the time the first review is submitted. That should be more than enough to take into account timezones and PRs open at the end of the day. It gives us at least a full working day to get to it.
```

### PR size

If you think the PR is too big and/or could be split in smaller chunks in order to make the review easier, talk to the author. It is acceptable to ask for a PR to be split before moving forward with the review.

### PR assignment

If you don’t think you should be in a particular PR or you don’t think you will have the time to do it, talk to the author so they can find a replacement if needed. Don’t let it sit, if you are assigned, you are still responsible for reviewing it. The GitHub notifications section is very useful to check if you are assigned to a PR.

### Review comments

Making your intent as a reviewer more clear helps the author decide on the next steps, prioritizing their work and avoid future back and forth:

* Whenever it’s something you don’t need to be changed in order to approve the PR, prepend it with “Nit:”. It’s fast, short and everyone understand it. If it’s not necessarily a suggested change and it’s purely educational, make that clear as well. When possible, use the "Add a suggestion" feature. This makes it easier to deal with spelling, one-time-use variable naming, grammar, small logical adjustments, etc.

> * If you are ok with resolving one or your comments in a future PR, let the author know. This one is a bit tricky because in general, we don’t want comments to be left for later, if we write them is for a reason. But it’s true that there are times where what we ask for is too big and/or complex and will make more damage to the PR than good to the codebase. If that’s the case and there is no risk implementing it later, let the author know.

Reviewer 4: Instead of "ok" you should probably write "okay" or "OK" instead.

>     * In general, all the code should be merged with unit tests. Separating the code from its tests in different PRs is not advisable, since there will be un undetermined period of time while a part of the system remains untested.

Reviewer 4: Did you mean to indent this bullet under the other bullet?

### Light reviews

> It’s totally ok to take a look to a PR and leave comments even if you don’t have the time or the confidence to approve it. More people looking at the code is always better. Even if your comments are only questions. Worse case scenario, the author has an answer and you learn something. Best case scenario, the reviewer doesn’t have an answer so you both learn something and the code ends up being better.

Reviewer 4: Same. Instead of "ok" you should probably write "okay" or "OK" instead.

If that’s case, make it clear so the author doesn't keep waiting for your approval.

### When to approve

These are some questions to ask oneself that can useful in this process:

* Do I understand what the problem is?
* Do I understand why are we solving the problem?

> * Do I think we should be solving this problem? This one can be a bit tricky. This should probably have been brought up during release/feature/whatever planning. If it was and the team decided to do it, move on, the answer is already yes. If it wasn’t, be careful with how you approach it but question it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Do I think we should be solving this problem? This one can be a bit tricky. This should probably have been brought up during release, feature, or whatever planning. If it was, and the team decided to do it, move on. The answer is already yes. If it wasn’t, be careful with how you approach it but question it.
```

* Do I understand what the proposed solution is?
* Does the proposed solution solve the problem?

> * Does the code do what is supposed to do? (based on the proposed solution)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Does the code do what is supposed to do (based on the proposed solution)?
```

Once the answer to *all those questions is yes*, you can move to the next round:

> * Is there a better solution? Was this alternative considered? If it was, do I understand why it wasn’t selected?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Is there a better solution? Was an alternative considered? If it was, do I understand why it wasn’t selected?
```
Is that what you meant?

Author: Made this more clear

* Do I agree with the selection of the solution? Can I prove that my option is better with data or referring to solid engineering principles? Or is this purely preference based?

> Note: *solution* here is used quite generically and doesn't necessarily refer only to high level design. It includes code structure, code patterns, abstractions... When there is a design doc, the high level solution should already have been agreed before opening the PR, but we should still ask these questions about the solution's implementation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: *solution* here is used quite generically and doesn't necessarily refer only to high level design. It includes code structure, code patterns, abstractions, and so on. When there is a design doc, the high-level solution should already have been agreed upon before opening the PR. but we should still ask these questions about the solution's implementation.
```

> Whether you push back when the answer to these questions is no, is up to you. It requires a balance between risk, helping the team move forward and the importance of the suggested changes. In general, we recommend:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Whether or not you push back, when the answer to these questions is no, is up to you. It requires a balance between risk, helping the team move forward and the importance of the suggested changes. In general, we recommend:
```

> * Don’t stop asking questions until you understand the decision being made even if you disagree. Note: try to find a balance between creating too much back and forth in thr PR comments and solving everything on private discussions. When a decision is made in a private conversation, summarize it in a PR comment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Don’t stop asking questions until you understand the decision being made, even if you disagree. Try to find a balance between creating too much back and forth in the PR comments and solving everything on private discussions. When a decision is made in a private conversation, summarize it in a PR comment.
```

* Don’t block your team only because you have a different personal preference.

And finally, you can move forward to the code itself:

* Is the code making the codebase better? If the answer is no, don’t approve it. But remember that it doesn’t need to be perfect to be better. When is the code better? We’ll leave that up to you to answer. When you do, write a doc please.
* Is the code properly tested or is there a plan in place to test it properly? If the answer is no, don’t approve it.

> * When necessary, encourage folks to create follow up tickets, so feedback and improvement ideas don't get lost.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* When necessary, encourage folks to create follow-up tickets, so feedback and improvement ideas don't get lost.
```

> If you get here, you are done, approve it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you get here, you are done. Approve it.
```

* Try to look at your PR from a reviewer perspective: what would you need to be able to review that PR successfully? Common topics:
    * What problem are we solving
    * Why are we solving it
    * How are we doing it
* Be explicit, even if you think certain information can be inferred from the code, don’t rely on that. Specify everything that is not obvious.
* If they exists, link related GitHub issue/s.
* If they exist (and they are public), link design docs.
* Reflect all the information that is not documented anywhere else:
    * Decisions made in other PRs/issues/private conversations
    * New requirements
    * How does this PR fit the whole project/feature? Very important if splitting something bigger into small PRs. It helps the reviewer fill the gaps and look at you high level solution without having all the code in front of them.

Same as in the previous point, not all PRs are the same. There are some times when code is self-explanatory, specially when paired with a good commit message. Be careful with this but also exploit it and avoid extra work when you are confident you can.

`TODO: add concrete example for a good PR description`

### Review your own changes

> Reviewing your own changes increases code quality and streamlines reviews. Add comments to your own PR to notify reviewers you've identified the problem and they don't need to comment. Draw attention from reviewers on areas of code your unsure about and ask for additional input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reviewing your own changes increases code quality and streamlines reviews. Add comments to your own PR to notify reviewers you've identified the problem and they don't need to comment. Draw attention from reviewers on areas of code you're unsure about and ask for additional input.
```

My bad

# Pull Request guidelines
This document outlines some good practices to follow when creating or reviewing PRs. These are all guidelines and not hard rules, so take them as so.

## As an author

### PR size

We don't have a hard limit since that would be too prescriptive and inflexible. However, the recommendation is to not exceed 500 lines of code.

Split them if necessary, following the Single Responsibility Principle.

> That said, beware that not all PRs are created equal. It doesn’t produce the same cognitive load to review a PR with 10 new lines of actual code and 500 lines of tests and data files than 200 lines of actual code changes over 20 different files. Prioritize making the review easier, but don’t create extra work for yourself just to align with a random self imposed number. When in doubt, talk to your reviewers and find something that you both feel comfortable with.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to be careful here. Its worded as if test code is exempt, entirely, from the 500 LoC recommendation. I don't think that's wise. Test code is just code. It still needs reviewing like any other piece of code. Dependent on how the tests are written, i.e. if someones tried to be clever and de-duplicate a bunch of stuff, it could be low or high cognitive load.

What do we think about making it abundantly clear with the following

> The recommended maximum lines of change is 500. Split PRs as necessary and be guided by the Single Responsibility Principle. Put yourself in the reviewers shoes and consider the cognitive load on the reviewer.
>
> For example, a PR with 1000 LoC touching 20 files could be easy to review if the changes are grammar or could be difficult to review if there are functional changes in loosely related components.

### PR descriptions

> This is the best way to help the reviewer build context about the changes in an asynchronous way. Not only that but it serves in a way as documentation for both engineers when tracking down a commit in the future and for outside contributors to get a feel for what a change is/does, how to get involved with it, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Help the reviewer build context asynchronously with a well structured PR description. A good description can serve as documentation for author and reviewer when tracking down changes in the future and for outside contributors to get a feel for what a change is in regard to.
```

* Assume the reviewer knows nothing about your work.
* Try to look at your PR from a reviewer perspective: what would you need to be able to review that PR successfully? Common topics:
    * What problem are we solving
    * Why are we solving it
    * How are we doing it
* Be explicit, even if you think certain information can be inferred from the code, don’t rely on that. Specify everything that is not obvious.
* If they exists, link related GitHub issue/s.
* If they exist (and they are public), link design docs.
* Reflect all the information that is not documented anywhere else:
    * Decisions made in other PRs/issues/private conversations
    * New requirements
    * How does this PR fit the whole project/feature? Very important if splitting something bigger into small PRs. It helps the reviewer fill the gaps and look at you high level solution without having all the code in front of them.

Same as in the previous point, not all PRs are the same. There are some times when code is self-explanatory, specially when paired with a good commit message. Be careful with this but also exploit it and avoid extra work when you are confident you can.

> `TODO: add concrete example for a good PR description`

Author: @danbudris @chrisdoherty4 could you guys help me with this?
You are both very good at this so I'm not sure if we can just use a concrete example from a real PR or we want to write something ad-hoc for this doc

Reviewer 2: Will draft something shortly.

Reviewer: a link to one of these could work, I think they're pretty good examples of mine -- might be able to find a better one if we looked harder

https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/1175
https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/237

### Review your own changes

> This can dramatically speed up reviews as you're putting yourself in your reviewers shoes. Use the PR comments if you want to add extra context around specific pieces of code.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reviewing your own changes increases code quality and streamlines reviews. Add comments to your own PR to notify reviewers you've identified the problem and they don't need to comment. Draw attention from reviewers on areas of code your unsure about and ask for additional input.
```

> `TODO: complete this section`

Author: @danbudris @chrisdoherty4 looking at you both again since you proposed this section

### Review comments

Making your intent as a reviewer more clear helps the author decide on the next steps, prioritizing their work and avoid future back and forth:

* Whenever it’s something you don’t need to be changed in order to approve the PR, prepend it with “Nit:”. It’s fast, short and everyone understand it. If it’s not necessarily a suggested change and it’s purely educational, make that clear as well. When possible, use the "Add a suggestion" feature. This makes it easier to deal with spelling, one-time-use variable naming, grammar, small logical adjustments, etc.
* If you are ok with resolving one or your comments in a future PR, let the author know. This one is a bit tricky because in general, we don’t want comments to be left for later, if we write them is for a reason. But it’s true that there are times where what we ask for is too big and/or complex and will make more damage to the PR than good to the codebase. If that’s the case and there is no risk implementing it later, let the author know.

> `TODO: add some examples for what is ok to postpone and what is not`

Author: @chrisdoherty4 looking at you here since you proposed this
I was thinking one clear example could be unit tests (we don't postpone unit tests unless the code is under a feature toggle)
Anything else?

Reviewer 2: I think unit tests is a bit of a special case. Some people do the whole "I'll write them later" but frankly I think there's rarely, if ever, a good reason to do that. 

Beyond unit tests, its really up to people to discuss it with the reviewer. Does that resonate with you?

Author: Yeah, sounds good. I was only following up on this since you mentioned before we should probably add some examples about what's ok to postpone and what's not.
I added a little bit about unit tests, let me know.

Reviewer 2: lgtm
